+++
draft = false
author = "seantallen"
categories = [
    "Release",
]
date = "2017-10-17T20:00:06-04:00"
title = "0.20.0 Released"
+++
Pony 0.20.0 is recommended update. It contains one small breaking change that is unlikely to effect most users.

<!--more-->

## Replace memory-leak-inciting `Writer.reserve` with more intuitive `Writer.reserve_current` method

`Writer.reserve` has been removed from the `Writer` package. Any calls to it should be replaced with a call to `Writer.reserve_current`. Note, that the semantics of the calls are somewhat different, so a direct swap isn't advised.
`Writer.reserve` would allocate _X_ amount of additional memory. This non-intuitive API was leading some users to leak memory accidentally. The new `reserve_current` will make sure that the buffer has enough space to hold _X_ bytes. 

## Turn off LTO by default on OSX 

Link-time optimization, or LTO, is an optimization that can be applied to Pony programs to increase performance. It was only on by default for OSX. The could, however, lead to "spooky action at a distance" breakage of a Pony install. Upgrading XCode without reinstalling Pony will result in a broken compiler if LTO is on. We've decided to turn off LTO by default so that users have to knowingly opt-in to using it and won't potentially be greeted with confusing error message should they upgrade XCode.

### Fixed

- Forbid single underscore in case expr and case methods ([PR #2269](https://github.com/ponylang/ponyc/pull/2269))

### Changed

- Turn off LTO by default on OSX ([PR #2284](https://github.com/ponylang/ponyc/pull/2284))
- Replace memory-leak-inciting `Writer.reserve` with more intuitive `Writer.reserve_current` method. ([PR #2260](https://github.com/ponylang/ponyc/pull/2260))
